John Kennedy Toole


A Confederacy of Dunces




When a true genius appears in the world, you may know him by this sign,
that the dunces are all in confederacy against him.

-- Jonathan Swift

"THOUGHTS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS, MORAL AND DIVERTING"





Foreword





Perhaps the best way to introduce this novel -- which on my third
reading of it astounds me even more than the first -- is to tell of my
first encounter with it. While I was teaching at Loyola in 1976 I began
to get telephone calls from a lady unknown to me. What she proposed was
preposterous. It was not that she had written a couple of chapters of a
novel and wanted to get into my class. It was that her son, who was
dead, had written an entire novel during the early sixties, a big novel,
and she wanted me to read it. Why would I want to do that? I asked her.
Because it is a great novel, she said.

Over the years I have become very good at getting out of things I don't
want to do. And if ever there was something I didn't want to do, this
was surely it: to deal with the mother of a dead novelist and, worst of
all, to have to read a manuscript that she said was great, and that, as
it turned out, was a badly smeared, scarcely readable carbon.

But the lady was persistent, and it somehow came to pass that she stood
in my office handing me the hefty manuscript. There was no getting out
of it; only one hope remained -- that I could read a few pages and that
they would be bad enough for me, in good conscience, to read no farther.
Usually I can do just that. Indeed the first paragraph often suffices.
My only fear was that this one might not be bad enough, or might be just
good enough, so that I would have to keep reading.

In this case I read on. And on. First with the sinking feeling that it
was not bad enough to quit, then with a prickle of interest, then a
growing excitement, and finally an incredulity: surely it was not
possible that it was so good. I shall resist the temptation to say what
first made me gape, grin, laugh out loud, shake my head in wonderment.
Better let the reader make the discovery on his own.

Here at any rate is Ignatius Reilly, without progenitor in any
literature I know of -- slob extraordinary, a mad Oliver Hardy, a fat
Don Quixote, a perverse Thomas Aquinas rolled into one -- who is in
violent revolt against the entire modern age, lying in his flannel
nightshirt, in a back bedroom on Constantinople Street in New Orleans,
who between gigantic seizures of flatulence and eructations is filling
dozens of Big Chief tablets with invective.

His mother thinks he needs to go to work. He does, in a succession of
jobs. Each job rapidly escalates into a lunatic adventure, a full-blown
disaster; yet each has, like Don Quixote's, its own eerie logic.

His girlfriend, Myrna Minkoff of the Bronx, thinks he needs sex. What
happens between Myrna and Ignatius is like no other boy-meets-girl story
in my experience.

By no means a lesser virtue of Toole's novel is his rendering of the
particularities of New Orleans, its back streets, its out-of-the-way
neighborhoods, its odd speech, its ethnic whites -- and one black in
whom Toole has achieved the near-impossible, a superb comic character of
immense wit and resourcefulness without the least trace of Rastus
minstrelsy.

But Toole's greatest achievement is Ignatius Reilly himself,
intellectual, ideologue, deadbeat, goof-off, glutton, who should repel
the reader with his gargantuan bloats, his thunderous contempt and
one-man war against everybody -- Freud, homosexuals, heterosexuals,
Protestants, and the assorted excesses of modern times. Imagine an
Aquinas gone to pot, transported to New Orleans whence he makes a wild
foray through the swamps to LSU at Baton Rouge, where his lumber jacket
is stolen in the faculty men's room where he is seated, overcome by
mammoth gastro-intestinal problems. His pyloric valve periodically
closes in response to the lack of a "proper geometry and theology" in
the modern world.

I hesitate to use the word comedy -- though comedy it is -- because that
implies simply a funny book, and this novel is a great deal more than
that. A great rumbling farce of Falstaffian dimensions would better
describe it; commedia would be closer to it.

It is also sad. One never quite knows where the sadness comes from --
from the tragedy at the heart of Ignatius's great gaseous rages and
lunatic adventures or the tragedy attending the book itself.

The tragedy of the book is the tragedy of the author -- his suicide in
1969 at the age of thirty-two. Another tragedy is the body of work we
have been denied.

It is a great pity that John Kennedy Toole is not alive and well and
writing. But he is not, and there is nothing we can do about it but make
sure that this gargantuan tumultuous human tragicomedy is at least made
available to a world of readers.



WALKER PERCY

There is a New Orleans city accent... associated with downtown New
Orleans, particularly with the German and Irish Third Ward, that is hard
to distinguish from the accent of Hoboken, Jersey City, and Astoria,
Long Island, where the Al Smith inflection, extinct in Manhattan, has
taken refuge. The reason, as you might expect, is that the same stocks
that brought the accent to Manhattan imposed it on New Orleans.



-- -- --



"You're right on that. We're Mediterranean. I've never been to Greece or
Italy, but I'm sure I'd be at home there as soon as I landed."

He would, too, I thought. New Orleans resembles Genoa or Marseilles, or
Beirut or the Egyptian Alexandria more than it does New York, although
all seaports resemble one another more than they can resemble any place
in the interior. Like Havana and Port-au-Prince, New Orleans is within
the orbit of a Hellenistic world that never touched the North Atlantic.
The Mediterranean, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico form a homogeneous,
though interrupted, sea.

A. J. Liebling,

THE EARL OF LOUISIANA





One





A green hunting cap squeezed the top of the fleshy balloon of a head.
The green earflaps, full of large ears and uncut hair and the fine
bristles that grew in the ears themselves, stuck out on either side like
turn signals indicating two directions at once. Full, pursed lips
protruded beneath the bushy black moustache and, at their corners, sank
into little folds filled with disapproval and potato chip crumbs. In the
shadow under the green visor of the cap Ignatius J. Reilly's
supercilious blue and yellow eyes looked down upon the other people
waiting under the clock at the D. H. Holmes department store, studying
the crowd of people for signs of bad taste in dress. Several of the
outfits, Ignatius noticed, were new enough and expensive enough to be
properly considered offenses against taste and decency. Possession of
anything new or expensive only reflected a person's lack of theology and
geometry; it could even cast doubts upon one's soul.

Ignatius himself was dressed comfortably and sensibly. The hunting cap
prevented head colds. The voluminous tweed trousers were durable and
permitted unusually free locomotion. Their pleats and nooks contained
pockets of warm, stale air that soothed Ignatius. The plaid flannel
shirt made a jacket unnecessary while the muffler guarded exposed Reilly
skin between earflap and collar. The outfit was acceptable by any
theological and geometrical standards, however abstruse, and suggested a
rich inner life.

Shifting from one hip to the other in his lumbering, elephantine
fashion, Ignatius sent waves of flesh rippling beneath the tweed and
flannel, waves that broke upon buttons and seams. Thus rearranged, he
contemplated the long while that he had been waiting for his mother.
Principally he considered the discomfort he was beginning to feel. It
seemed as if his whole being was ready to burst from his swollen suede
desert boots, and, as if to verify this, Ignatius turned his singular
eyes toward his feet. The feet did indeed look swollen. He was prepared
to offer the sight of those bulging boots to his mother as evidence of
her thoughtlessness. Looking up, he saw the sun beginning to descend
over the Mississippi at the foot of Canal Street. The Holmes clock said
almost five. Already he was polishing a few carefully worded accusations
designed to reduce his mother to repentance or, at least, confusion. He
often had to keep her in her place.

She had driven him downtown in the old Plymouth, and while she was at
the doctor's seeing about her arthritis, Ignatius had bought some sheet
music at Werlein's for his trumpet and a new string for his lute. Then
he had wandered into the Penny Arcade on Royal Street to see whether any
new games had been installed. He had been disappointed to find the
miniature mechanical baseball game gone. Perhaps it was only being
repaired. The last time that he had played it the batter would not work
and, after some argument, the management had returned his nickel, even
though the Penny Arcade people had been base enough to suggest that
Ignatius had himself broken the baseball machine by kicking it.

Concentrating upon the fate of the miniature baseball machine, Ignatius
detached his being from the physical reality of Canal Street and the
people around him and therefore did not notice the two eyes that were
hungrily watching him from behind one of D. H. Holmes' pillars, two sad
eyes shining with hope and desire.

Was it possible to repair the machine in New Orleans? Probably so.
However, it might have to be sent to some place like Milwaukee or
Chicago or some other city whose name Ignatius associated with efficient
repair shops and permanently smoking factories. Ignatius hoped that the
baseball game was being carefully handled in shipment, that none of its
little players was being chipped or maimed by brutal railroad employees
determined to ruin the railroad forever with damage claims from
shippers, railroad employees who would subsequently go on strike and
destroy the Illinois Central.

As Ignatius was considering the delight which the little baseball game
afforded humanity, the two sad and covetous eyes moved toward him
through the crowd like torpedoes zeroing in on a great woolly tanker.
The policeman plucked at Ignatius's bag of sheet music.

"You got any identification, mister?" the policeman asked in a voice
that hoped that Ignatius was officially unidentified.

"What?" Ignatius looked down upon the badge on the blue cap. "Who are
you?"

"Let me see your driver's license."

"I don't drive. Will you kindly go away? I am waiting for my mother."

"What's this hanging out your bag?"

"What do you think it is, stupid? It's a string for my lute."

"What's that?" The policeman drew back a little. "Are you local?"

"Is it the part of the police department to harass me when this city is
a flagrant vice capital of the civilized world?" Ignatius bellowed over
the crowd in front of the store. "This city is famous for its gamblers,
prostitutes, exhibitionists, anti-Christs, alcoholics, sodomites, drug
addicts, fetishists, onanists, pornographers, frauds, jades, litterbugs,
and lesbians, all of whom are only too well protected by graft. If you
have a moment, I shall endeavor to discuss the crime problem with you,
but don't make the mistake of bothering me."

The policeman grabbed Ignatius by the arm and was struck on his cap with
the sheet music. The dangling lute string whipped him on the ear.

"Hey," the policeman said.

"Take that!" Ignatius cried, noticing that a circle of interested
shoppers was beginning to form.

Inside D. H. Holmes, Mrs. Reilly was in the bakery department pressing
her maternal breast against a glass case of macaroons. With one of her
fingers, chafed from many years of scrubbing her son's mammoth, yellowed
drawers, she tapped on the glass case to attract the saleslady.

"Oh, Miss Inez," Mrs. Reilly called in that accent that occurs south of
New Jersey only in New Orleans, that Hoboken near the Gulf of Mexico.
"Over here, babe."

"Hey, how you making?" Miss Inez asked. "How you feeling, darling?"

"Not so hot," Mrs. Reilly answered truthfully.

"Ain't that a shame." Miss Inez leaned over the glass case and forgot
about her cakes. "I don't feel so hot myself. It's my feet."

"Lord, I wisht I was that lucky. I got arthuritis in my elbow."

"Aw, no!" Miss Inez said with genuine sympathy. "My poor old poppa's got
that. We make him go set himself in a hot tub fulla berling water."

"My boy's floating around in our tub all day long. I can't hardly get in
my own bathroom no more."

"I thought he was married, precious."

"Ignatius? Eh, la la," Mrs. Reilly said sadly. "Sweetheart, you wanna
gimme two dozen of them fancy mix?"

"But I thought you told me he was married," Miss Inez said while she was
putting the cakes in a box.

"He ain't even got him a prospect. The little girl friend he had flew
the coop."

"Well, he's got time."

"I guess so," Mrs. Reilly said disinterestedly. "Look, you wanna gimme
half a dozen wine cakes, too? Ignatius gets nasty if we run outta cake."

"Your boy likes his cake, huh?"

"Oh, Lord, my elbow's killing me," Mrs. Reilly answered.

In the center of the crowd that had formed before the department store
the hunting cap, the green radius of the circle of people, was bobbing
about violently.

"I shall contact the mayor," Ignatius was shouting.

"Let the boy alone," a voice said from the crowd.

"Go get the strippers on Bourbon Street," an old man added. "He's a good
boy. He's waiting for his momma."

"Thank you," Ignatius said haughtily. "I hope that all of you will bear
witness to this outrage."

"You come with me," the policeman said to Ignatius with waning
self-confidence. The crowd was turning into something of a mob, and
there was no traffic patrolman in sight. "We're going to the precinct."

"A good boy can't even wait for his momma by D. H. Holmes." It was the
old man again. "I'm telling you, the city was never like this. It's the
communiss."

"Are you calling me a communiss?" the policeman asked the old man while
he tried to avoid the lashing of the lute string. "I'll take you in,
too. You better watch out who you calling a communiss."

"You can't arress me," the old man cried. "I'm a member of the Golden
Age Club sponsored by the New Orleans Recreation Department."

"Let that old man alone, you dirty cop," a woman screamed. "He's prolly
somebody's grampaw."

"I am," the old man said. "I got six granchirren all studying with the
sisters. Smart, too."

Over the heads of the people Ignatius saw his mother walking slowly out
of the lobby of the department store carrying the bakery products as if
they were boxes of cement.

"Mother!" he called. "Not a moment too soon. I've been seized."

Pushing through the people, Mrs. Reilly said, "Ignatius! What's going on
here? What you done now? Hey, take your hands off my boy."

"I'm not touching him, lady," the policeman said. "Is this here your
son?"

Mrs. Reilly snatched the whizzing lute string from Ignatius.

"Of course I'm her child," Ignatius said. "Can't you see her affection
for me?"

"She loves her boy," the old man said.

"What you trying to do my poor child?" Mrs. Reilly asked the policeman.
Ignatius patted his mother's hennaed hair with one of his huge paws.
"You got plenty business picking on poor chirren with all the kind of
people they got running in this town. Waiting for his momma and they try
to arrest him."

"This is clearly a case for the Civil Liberties Union," Ignatius
observed, squeezing his mother's drooping shoulder with the paw. "We
must contact Myrna Minkoff, my lost love. She knows about those things."

"It's the communiss," the old man interrupted.

"How old is he?" the policeman asked Mrs. Reilly.

"I am thirty," Ignatius said condescendingly.

"You got a job?"

"Ignatius hasta help me at home," Mrs. Reilly said. Her initial courage
was failing a little, and she began to twist the lute string with the
cord on the cake boxes. "I got terrible arthuritis."

"I dust a bit," Ignatius told the policeman. "In addition, I am at the
moment writing a lengthy indictment against our century. When my brain
begins to reel from my literary labors, I make an occasional cheese
dip."

"Ignatius makes delicious cheese dips," Mrs. Reilly said.

"That's very nice of him," the old man said. "Most boys are out running
around all the time."

"Why don't you shut up?" the policeman said to the old man.

"Ignatius," Mrs. Reilly asked in a trembling voice, "what you done,
boy?"

"Actually, Mother, I believe that it was he who started everything."
Ignatius pointed to the old man with his bag of sheet music. "I was
simply standing about, waiting for you, praying that the news from the
doctor would be encouraging."

"Get that old man outta here," Mrs. Reilly said to the policeman. "He's
making trouble. It's a shame they got people like him walking the
streets."

"The police are all communiss," the old man said.

"Didn't I say for you to shut up?" the policeman said angrily.

"I fall on my knees every night to thank my God we got protection," Mrs.
Reilly told the crowd. "We'd all be dead without the police. We'd all be
laying in our beds with our throats cut open from ear to ear."

"That's the truth, girl," some woman answered from the crowd.

"Say a rosary for the police force." Mrs. Reilly was now addressing her
remarks to the crowd. Ignatius caressed her shoulders wildly, whispering
encouragement. "Would you say a rosary for a communiss?"

"No!" several voices answered fervently. Someone pushed the old man.

"It's true, lady," the old man cried. "He tried to arrest your boy. Just
like in Russia. They're all communiss."

"Come on," the policeman said to the old man. He grabbed him roughly by
the back of the coat.

"Oh, my God!" Ignatius said, watching the wan little policeman try to
control the old man. "Now my nerves are totally frayed."

"Help!" the old man appealed to the crowd. "It's a takeover. It's a
violation of the Constitution!"

"He's crazy, Ignatius," Mrs. Reilly said. "We better get outta here,
baby." She turned to the crowd. "Run, folks. He might kill us all.
Personally, I think maybe he's the communiss."

"You don't have to overdo it, Mother," Ignatius said as they pushed
through the dispersing crowd and started walking rapidly down Canal
Street. He looked back and saw the old man and the bantam policeman
grappling beneath the department store clock. "Will you please slow down
a bit? I think I'm having a heart murmur."

"Oh, shut up. How you think I feel? I shouldn't haveta be running like
this at my age."

"The heart is important at any age, I'm afraid."

"They's nothing wrong with your heart."

"There will be if we don't go a little slower." The tweed trousers
billowed around Ignatius's gargantuan rump as he rolled forward. "Do you
have my lute string?"

Mrs. Reilly pulled him around the corner onto Bourbon Street, and they
started walking down into the French Quarter.

"How come that policeman was after you, boy?"

"I shall never know. But he will probably be coming after us in a few
moments, as soon as he has subdued that aged fascist."

"You think so?" Mrs. Reilly asked nervously.

"I would imagine so. He seemed determined to arrest me. He must have
some sort of quota or something. I seriously doubt that he will permit
me to elude him so easily."

"Wouldn't that be awful! You'd be all over the papers, Ignatius. The
disgrace! You musta done something while you was waiting for me,
Ignatius. I know you, boy."

"If anyone was ever minding his business, it was I," Ignatius breathed.
"Please. We must stop. I think I'm going to have a hemorrhage."

"Okay." Mrs. Reilly looked at her son's reddening face and realized that
he would very happily collapse at her feet just to prove his point. He
had done it before. The last time that she had forced him to accompany
her to mass on Sunday he had collapsed twice on the way to the church
and had collapsed once again during the sermon about sloth, reeling out
of the pew and creating an embarrassing disturbance. "Let's go in here
and sit down."

She pushed him through the door of the Night of Joy bar with one of the
cake boxes. In the darkness that smelled of bourbon and cigarette butts
they climbed onto two stools. While Mrs. Reilly arranged her cake boxes
on the bar, Ignatius spread his expansive nostrils and said, "My God,
Mother, it smells awful. My stomach is beginning to churn."

"You wanna go back on the street? You want that policeman to take you
in?"

Ignatius did not answer; he was sniffing loudly and making faces. A
bartender, who had been observing the two, asked quizzically from the
shadows, "Yes?"

"I shall have a coffee," Ignatius said grandly. "Chicory coffee with
boiled milk."

"Only instant," the bartender said.

"I can't possibly drink that," Ignatius told his mother. "It's an
abomination."

"Well, get a beer, Ignatius. It won't kill you."

"I may bloat."

"I'll take a Dixie 45," Mrs. Reilly said to the bartender.

"And the gentleman?" the bartender asked in a rich, assumed voice. "What
is his pleasure?"

"Give him a Dixie, too."

"I may not drink it," Ignatius said as the bartender went off to open
the beers.

"We can't sit in here for free, Ignatius."

"I don't see why not. We're the only customers. They should be glad to
have us."

"They got strippers in here at night, huh?" Mrs. Reilly nudged her son.

"I would imagine so," Ignatius said coldly. He looked quite pained. "We
might have stopped somewhere else. I suspect that the police will raid
this place momentarily anyway." He snorted loudly and cleared his
throat. "Thank God my moustache filters out some of the stench. My
olfactories are already beginning to send out distress signals."

After what seemed a long time during which there was much tinkling of
glass and closing of coolers somewhere in the shadows, the bartender
appeared again and set the beers before them, pretending to knock
Ignatius's beer into his lap. The Reillys were getting the Night of
Joy's worst service, the treatment given unwanted customers.

"You don't by any chance have a cold Dr. Nut, do you?" Ignatius asked.

"No."

"My son loves Dr. Nut," Mrs. Reilly explained. "I gotta buy it by the
case. Sometimes he sits himself down and drinks two, three Dr. Nuts at
one time."

"I am sure that this man is not particularly interested," Ignatius said.

"Like to take that cap off?" the bartender asked.

"No, I wouldn't!" Ignatius thundered. "There's a chill in here."

"Suit yourself," the bartender said and drifted off into the shadows at
the other end of the bar.

"Really!"

"Calm down," his mother said.

Ignatius raised the earflap on the side next to his mother.

"Well, I will lift this so that you won't have to strain your voice.
What did the doctor tell you about your elbow or whatever it is?"

"It's gotta be massaged."

"I hope you don't want me to do that. You know how I feel about touching
other people."

"He told me to stay out the cold as much as possible."

"If I could drive, I would be able to help you more, I imagine."

"Aw, that's okay, honey."

"Actually, even riding in a car affects me enough. Of course, the worst
thing is riding on top in one of those Greyhound Scenicruisers. So high
up. Do you remember the time that I went to Baton Rouge in one of those?
I vomited several times. The driver had to stop the bus somewhere in the
swamps to let me get off and walk around for a while. The other
passengers were rather angry. They must have had stomachs of iron to
ride in that awful machine. Leaving New Orleans also frightened me
considerably. Outside of the city limits the heart of darkness, the true
wasteland begins."

"I remember that, Ignatius," Mrs. Reilly said absently, drinking her
beer in gulps. "You was really sick when you got back home."

"I felt better then. The worst moment was my arrival in Baton Rouge. I
realized that I had a round-trip ticket and would have to return on the
bus."

"You told me that, babe."

"The taxi back to New Orleans cost me forty dollars, but at least I
wasn't violently ill during the taxi ride, although I felt myself
beginning to gag several times. I made the driver go very slowly, which
was unfortunate for him. The state police stopped him twice for being
below the minimum highway speed limit. On the third time that they
stopped him they took away his chauffeur's license. You see, they had
been watching us on the radar all along."

Mrs. Reilly's attention wavered between her son and the beer. She had
been listening to the story for three years.

"Of course," Ignatius continued, mistaking his mother's rapt look for
interest, "that was the only time that I had ever been out of New
Orleans in my life. I think that perhaps it was the lack of a center of
orientation that might have upset me. Speeding along in that bus was
like hurtling into the abyss. By the time we had left the swamps and
reached those rolling hills near Baton Rouge, I was getting afraid that
some rural red-necks might toss bombs at the bus. They love to attack
vehicles, which are a symbol of progress, I guess."

"Well, I'm glad you didn't take the job," Mrs. Reilly said
automatically, taking guess as her cue.

"I couldn't possibly take the job. When I saw the chairman of the
Medieval Culture Department, my hands began breaking out in small white
bumps. He was a totally soulless man. Then he made a comment about my
not wearing a tie and made some smirky remark about the lumber jacket. I
was appalled that so meaningless a person would dare such effrontery.
That lumber jacket was one of the few creature comforts to which I've
ever been really attached, and if I ever find the lunatic who stole it,
I shall report him to the proper authorities."

Mrs. Reilly saw again the horrible, coffee-stained lumber jacket that
she had always secretly wanted to give to the Volunteers of America
along with several other pieces of Ignatius's favorite clothing.

"You see, I was so overwhelmed by the complete grossness of that
spurious ‘chairman' that I ran from his office in the middle of one of
his cretinous ramblings and rushed to the nearest bathroom, which turned
out to be the one for ‘Faculty Men.' At any rate, I was seated in one of
the booths, having rested the lumber jacket on top of the door of the
booth. Suddenly I saw the jacket being whisked over the door. I heard
footsteps. Then the door of the restroom closed. At the moment, I was
unable to pursue the shameless thief, so I began to scream. Someone
entered the bathroom and knocked at the door of the booth. It turned out
to be a member of the campus security force, or so he said. Through the
door I explained what had just happened. He promised to find the jacket
and went away. Actually, as I have mentioned to you before, I have
always suspected that he and the ‘chairman' were the same person. Their
voices sounded somewhat similar."

"You sure can't trust nobody nowadays, honey."

"As soon as I could, I fled from the bathroom, eager only to get away
from that horrible place. Of course, I was almost frozen standing on
that desolate campus trying to hail a taxi. I finally got one that
agreed to take me to New Orleans for forty dollars, and the driver was
selfless enough to lend me his jacket. By the time we arrived here,
however, he was quite depressed about losing his license and had grown
rather surly. He also appeared to be developing a bad cold, judging by
the frequency of his sneezes. After all, we were on the highway for
almost two hours."

"I think I could drink me another beer, Ignatius."

"Mother! In this forsaken place?"

"Just one, baby. Come on, I want another."

"We're probably catching something from these glasses. However, if
you're quite determined about the thing, get me a brandy, will you?"

Mrs. Reilly signaled to the bartender, who came out of the shadows and
asked, "Now what happened to you on that bus, bud? I didn't get the end
of the story."

"Will you kindly tend the bar properly?" Ignatius asked furiously. "It
is your duty to silently serve when we call upon you. If we had wished
to include you in our conversation, we would have indicated it by now.
As a matter of fact, we are discussing rather urgent personal matters."

"The man's just trying to be nice, Ignatius. Shame on you."

"That in itself is a contradiction in terms. No one could possibly be
nice in a den like this."

"We want two more beers."

"One beer and one brandy," Ignatius corrected.

"No more clean glasses," the bartender said.

"Ain't that a shame," Mrs. Reilly said. "Well, we can use the ones we
got."

The bartender shrugged and went off into the shadows.





II





In the precinct the old man sat on a bench with the others, mostly
shoplifters, who composed the late afternoon haul. He had neatly
arranged along his thigh his Social Security card, his membership card
in the St. Odo of Cluny Holy Name Society, a Golden Age Club badge, and
a slip of paper identifying him as a member of the American Legion. A
young black man, eyeless behind spaceage sunglasses, studied the little
dossier on the thigh next to his.

"Whoa!" he said, grinning. "Say, you mus belong to everthin."

The old man rearranged his cards meticulously and said nothing.

"How come they draggin in somebody like you?" The sunglasses blew smoke
all over the old man's cards. "Them po-lice mus be gettin desperate."

"I'm here in violation of my constitutional rights," the old man said
with sudden anger.

"Well, they not gonna believe that. You better think up somethin else."
A dark hand reached for one of the cards. "Hey, wha this mean, ‘Colder
Age'?"

The old man snatched the card and put it back on his thigh.

"Them little card not gonna do you no good. They throw you in jail
anyway. They throw everbody in jail."

"You think so?" the old man asked the cloud of smoke.

"Sure." A new cloud floated up. "How come you here, man?"

"I don't know."

"You don know? Whoa! That crazy. You gotta be here for somethin. Plenty
time they pickin up color peoples for nothing, but, mister, you gotta be
here for somethin."

"I really don't know," the old man said glumly. "I was just standing in
a crowd in front of D. H. Holmes."

"And you lif somebody wallet."

"No, I called a policeman a name."

"Like wha you callin him?"

"Communiss."

"Cawmniss! Ooo-woo. If I call a po-lice a cawmniss, my ass be in Angola
right now for sure. I like to call one of them mother a cawmniss,
though. Like this afternoon I standin aroun in Woolsworth and some cat
steal a bag of cashew nuts out the ‘Nut House' star screaming like she
been stab. Hey! The nex thing, a flo'walk grabbin me, and then a po-lice
mother draggin me off. A man ain got a chance. Whoa!" His lips sucked at
the cigarette. "Nobody findin them cashews on me, but that po-lice still
draggin me off. I think that flo'walk a cawmniss. Mean motherfucker."

The old man cleared his throat and played with his cards.

"They probly let you go," the sunglasses said. "Me, they probly gimma a
little talk think it scare me, even though they know I ain got them
cashews. They probly try to prove I got them nuts. They probly buy a
bag, slip it in my pocket. Woolsworth probly try to send me up for
life."

The Negro seemed quite resigned and blew out a new cloud of blue smoke
that enveloped him and the old man and the little cards. Then he said to
himself, "I wonder who lif them nuts. Probly that flo'walk hisself."

A policeman summoned the old man up to the desk in the center of the
room where a sergeant was seated. The patrolman who had arrested him was
standing there.

"What's your name?" the sergeant asked the old man.

"Claude Robichaux," he answered and put his little cards on the desk
before the sergeant.

The sergeant looked over the cards and said, "Patrolman Mancuso here
says you resisted arrest and called him a communiss."

"I didn't mean it," the old man said sadly, noticing how fiercely the
sergeant was handling the little cards.

"Mancuso says you says all policemen are communiss."

"Oo-wee," the Negro said across the room.

"Will you shut up, Jones?" the sergeant called out.

"Okay," Jones answered.

"I'll get to you next."

"Say, I didn call nobody no cawmniss," Jones said. "I been frame by that
flo'walk in Woolsworth. I don even like cashews."

"Shut your mouth up."

"Okay," Jones said brightly and blew a great thundercloud of smoke.

"I didn't mean anything I said," Mr. Robichaux told the sergeant. "I
just got nervous. I got carried away. This policeman was trying to
arress a poor boy waiting for his momma by Holmes."

"What?" the sergeant turned to the wan little policeman. "What were you
trying to do?"

"He wasn't a boy," Mancuso said. "He was a big fat man dressed funny. He
looked like a suspicious character. I was just trying to make a routine
check and he started to resist. To tell you the truth, he looked like a
big prevert."

"A pervert, huh?" the sergeant asked greedily.

"Yes," Mancuso said with new confidence. "A great big prevert."

"How big?"

"The biggest I ever saw in my whole life," Mancuso said, stretching his
arms as if he were describing a fishing catch. The sergeant's eyes
shone. "The first thing I spotted was this green hunting cap he was
wearing."

Jones listened in attentive detachment somewhere within his cloud.

"Well, what happened, Mancuso? How come he's not standing here before
me?"

"He got away. This woman came out the store and got everything mixed up,
and she and him run around the corner into the Quarter."

"Oh, two Quarter characters," the sergeant said, suddenly enlightened.

"No, sir," the old man interrupted. "She was really his momma. A nice,
pretty lady. I seen them downtown before. This policeman frightened
her."

"Oh, listen, Mancuso," the sergeant screamed. "You're the only guy on
the force who'd try to arrest somebody away from his mother. And why did
you bring in grampaw here? Ring up his family and tell them to come get
him."

"Please," Mr. Robichaux pleaded. "Don't do that. My daughter's busy with
her kids. I never been arrested in my whole life. She can't come get me.
What are my granchirren gonna think? They're all studying with the
sisters."

"Get his daughter's number, Mancuso. That'll teach him to call us
communiss!"

"Please!" Mr. Robichaux was in tears. "My granchirren respect me."

"Jesus Christ!" the sergeant said. "Trying to arrest a kid with his
momma, bringing in somebody's grampaw. Get the hell outta here, Mancuso,
and take grampaw with you. You wanna arrest suspicious characters? We'll
fix you up."

"Yes, sir," Mancuso said weakly, leading the weeping old man away.

"Ooo-wee!" Jones said from the secrecy of his cloud.





III





Twilight was settling around the Night of Joy bar. Outside, Bourbon
Street was beginning to light up. Neon signs flashed off and on,
reflecting in the streets dampened by the light mist that had been
falling steadily for some time. The taxis bringing the evening's first
customers, midwestern tourists and conventioneers, made slight splashing
sounds in the cold dusk.

A few other customers were in the Night of Joy, a man who ran his finger
along a racing form, a depressed blonde who seemed connected with the
bar in some capacity, and an elegantly dressed young man who chainsmoked
Salems and drank frozen daiquiris in gulps.

"Ignatius, we better go," Mrs. Reilly said and belched.

"What?" Ignatius bellowed. "We must stay to watch the corruption. It's
already beginning to set in."

The elegant young man spilled his daiquiri on his bottle-green velvet
jacket.

"Hey, bartender," Mrs. Reilly called. "Get a rag. One of the customers
just spilled they drink."

"That's quite all right, darling," the young man said angrily. He arched
an eyebrow at Ignatius and his mother. "I think I'm in the wrong bar
anyway."

"Don't get upset, honey," Mrs. Reilly counseled. "What's that you
drinking? It looks like a pineapple snowball."

"Even if I described it to you, I doubt whether you'd understand what it
is."

"How dare you talk to my dear, beloved mother like that!"

"Oh, hush, you big thing," the young man snapped. "Just look at my
jacket."

"It's totally grotesque."

"Okay, now. Let's be friends," Mrs. Reilly said through foamy lips. "We
got enough bombs and things already."

"And your son seems to delight in dropping them, I must say."

"Okay, you two. This is the kinda place where everybody oughta have
themselves some fun." Mrs. Reilly smiled at the young man. "Let me buy
you another drink, babe, for the one you spilled. And I think I'll take
me another Dixie."

"I really must run," the young man sighed. "Thanks anyway."

"On a night like this?" Mrs. Reilly asked. "Aw, don't pay no mind to
what Ignatius says. Why don't you stay and see the show?"

The young man rolled his eyes heavenward.

"Yeah." The blonde broke her silence. "See some ass and tits."

"Mother," Ignatius said coldly. "I do believe that you are encouraging
these preposterous people."

"Well, you're the one wanted to stay, Ignatius."

"Yes, I did want to stay as an observer. I am not especially anxious to
mingle."

"Honey, to tell you the truth, I can't listen to that story about that
bus no more tonight. You already told it four times since we got here."

Ignatius looked hurt.

"I hardly suspected that I was boring you. After all, that bus ride was
one of the more formative experiences of my life. As a mother, you
should be interested in the traumas that have created my worldview."

"What's with the bus?" the blonde asked, moving to the stool next to
Ignatius. "My name's Darlene. I like good stories. You got a spicy one?"

The bartender slammed the beer and the daiquiri down just as the bus was
starting off on its journey in the vortex.

"Here, have a clean glass," the bartender snarled at Mrs. Reilly.

"Ain't that nice. Hey, Ignatius, I just got a clean glass."

But her son was too preoccupied with his arrival in Baton Rouge to hear
her.

"You know, sweetheart," Mrs. Reilly said to the young man, "me and my
boy was in trouble today. The police tried to arress him."

"Oh, my dear. Policemen are always so adamant, aren't they?"

"Yeah, and Ignatius got him a master's degree and all."

"What in the world was he doing?"

"Nothing. Just standing waiting for his poor, dear momma."

"His outfit is a little bizarre. I thought he was a performer of some
sort when I first came in, although I tried not to imagine the nature of
his act."

"I keep on telling him about his clothes, but he won't listen." Mrs.
Reilly looked at the back of her son's flannel shirt and at the hair
curling down the back of his neck. "That's sure pretty, that jacket you
got."

"Oh, this?" the young man asked, feeling the velvet on the sleeve. "I
don't mind telling you it cost a fortune. I found it in a dear little
shop in the Village."

"You don't look like you from the country."

"Oh, my," the young man sighed and lit a Salem with a great click of his
lighter. "I meant Greenwich Village in New York, sweetie. By the way,
where did you ever get that hat? It's truly fantastic."

"Aw, Lord, I had this since Ignatius made his First Communion."

"Would you consider selling it?"

"How come?"

"I'm a dealer in used clothing. I'll give you ten dollars for it."

"Aw, come on. For this?"

"Fifteen?"

"Really?" Mrs. Reilly removed the hat. "Sure, honey."

The young man opened his wallet and gave Mrs. Reilly three five dollar
bills. Draining his daiquiri glass, he stood up and said, "Now I really
must run."

"So soon?"

"It's been perfectly delightful meeting you."

"Take care out in the cold and wet."

The young man smiled, placed the hat carefully beneath his trench coat,
and left the bar.

"The radar patrol," Ignatius was telling Darlene, "is obviously rather
foolproof. It seems that the cab driver and I were making small dots on
their screen all the way from Baton Rouge."

"You was on radar," Darlene yawned. "Just think of that."

"Ignatius, we gotta go now," Mrs. Reilly said. "I'm hungry."

She turned toward him and knocked her beer bottle to the floor where it
broke into a spray of brown, jagged glass.

"Mother, are you making a scene?" Ignatius asked irritably. "Can't you
see that Miss Darlene and I are speaking? You have some cakes with you.
Eat those. You're always complaining that you never go anywhere. I would
have imagined that you would be enjoying your night on the town."

Ignatius was back on radar, so Mrs. Reilly reached in her boxes and ate
a brownie.

"Like one?" she asked the bartender. "They nice. I got some nice wine
cakes, too."

The bartender pretended to be looking for something on his shelves.

"I smell wine cakes," Darlene cried, looking past Ignatius.

"Have one, honey," Mrs. Reilly said.

"I think that I shall have one, too," Ignatius said. "I imagine that
they taste rather good with brandy."

Mrs. Reilly spread the box out on the bar. Even the man with the racing
form agreed to take a macaroon.

"Where you bought these nice wine cakes, lady?" Darlene asked Mrs.
Reilly. "They're nice and juicy."

"Over by Holmes, sugar. They got a good selection. Plenty variety."

"They are rather tasty," Ignatius conceded, sending out his flabby pink
tongue over his moustache to hunt for crumbs. "I think that I shall have
a macaroon or two. I have always found coconut to be good roughage."

He picked around in the box purposefully.

"Me, I always like some good cake after I finish eating," Mrs. Reilly
told the bartender, who turned his back on her.

"I bet you cook good, huh?" Darlene asked.

"Mother doesn't cook," Ignatius said dogmatically. "She burns."

"I used to cook too when I was married," Darlene told them. "I sort of
used a lot of that canned stuff, though. I like that Spanish rice they
got and that spaghetti with the tomato gravy."

"Canned food is a perversion," Ignatius said. "I suspect that it is
ultimately very damaging to the soul."

"Lord, my elbow's starting up again," Mrs. Reilly sighed.

"Please, I am speaking," her son told her. "I never eat canned food. I
did once, and I could feel my intestines starting to atrophy."

"You got a good education," Darlene said.

"Ignatius graduated from college. Then he stuck around there for four
more years to get him a master's degree. Ignatius graduated smart."

"‘Graduated smart,'" Ignatius repeated with some pique. "Please define
your terms. Exactly what do you mean by ‘graduated smart.'"

"Don't talk to your momma like that," Darlene said.

"Oh, he treats me bad sometimes," Mrs. Reilly said loudly and began to
cry. "You just don't know. When I think of all I done for that boy..."

"Mother, what are you saying?"

"You don't appreciate me."

"Stop that right now. I'm afraid that you've had too much beer."

"You treat me like garbage. I been good," Mrs. Reilly sobbed. She turned
to Darlene. "I spent all his poor Grammaw Reilly's insurance money to
keep him in college for eight years, and since then all he's done is lay
around the house watching television."

"You oughta be ashamed," Darlene said to Ignatius. "A big man like you.
Look at your poor momma."

Mrs. Reilly had collapsed, sobbing, on the bar, one hand clenched around
her beer glass.

"This is ridiculous. Mother, stop that."

"If I knew you was so crool, mister, I wouldna listened to your crazy
story about that Greyhound bus."

"Get up, Mother."

"You look like a big crazyman anyway," Darlene said. "I shoulda known.
Just look how that poor woman's crying."

Darlene tried to push Ignatius from his stool but sent him crashing into
his mother, who suddenly stopped crying and gasped, "My elbow!"

"What's going on here?" a woman asked from the padded chartreuse
leatherette door of the bar. She was a statuesque woman nearing middle
age, her fine body covered with a black leather overcoat that glistened
with mist. "I leave this place for a few hours to go shopping and look
what happens. I gotta be here every minute, I guess, to watch out you
people don't ruin my investment."

"Just two drunks," the bartender said. "I've been giving them the cold
shoulder since they come in, but they've been sticking like flies."

"But you, Darlene," the woman said. "You're big friends with them, huh?
Playing games on the stools with these two characters?"

"This guy's been mistreating his momma," Darlene explained.

"Mothers? We got mothers in here now? Business already stinks."

"I beg your pardon," Ignatius said.

The woman ignored him and looked at the broken and empty cake box on the
bar, saying, "Somebody's been having a picnic in here. Goddamit. I
already told you people about ants and rats."

"I beg your pardon," Ignatius said again. "My mother is present."

"It's just my luck to have this crap broken all over here just when I'm
looking for a janitor." The woman looked at the bartender. "Get these
two out."

"Yes, Miss Lee."

"Don't you worry," Mrs. Reilly said. "We're leaving."

"We certainly are," Ignatius added, lumbering toward the door, leaving
his mother behind to climb off her stool. "Hurry along, Mother. This
woman looks like a Nazi commandant. She may strike us."

"Wait!" Miss Lee screamed, grabbing Ignatius's sleeve. "How much these
characters owe?"

"Eight dollars," the bartender said.

"This is highway robbery!" Ignatius thundered. "You will hear from our
attorneys."

Mrs. Reilly paid with two of the bills the young man had given her and,
as she swayed past Miss Lee, she said, "We know when we not wanted. We
can take our trade elsewheres."

"Good," Miss Lee answered. "Beat it. Trade from people like you is the
kiss of death."

After the padded door had closed behind the Reillys, Miss Lee said, "I
never liked mothers. Not even my own."

"My mother was a whore," the man with the racing form said, not looking
up from his paper.

"Mothers are full of shit," Miss Lee observed and took off her leather
coat. "Now let's you and me have a little talk, Darlene."

Outside, Mrs. Reilly took her son's arm for support, but, as much as
they tried, they moved forward very slowly, although they seemed to move
sideward more easily. Their walking had developed a pattern: three quick
steps to the left, pause, three quick steps to the right, pause.

"That was a terrible woman," Mrs. Reilly said.

"A negation of all human qualities," Ignatius added. "By the way, how
far is the car? I'm very tired."

"On St. Ann, honey. Just a few blocks."

"You left your hat in the bar."

"Oh, I sold it to that young man."

"You sold it? Why? Did you ask me whether I wanted it to be sold? I was
very attached to that hat."

"I'm sorry, Ignatius. I didn't know you liked it so much. You never said
nothing about it."

"I had an unspoken attachment to it. It was a contact with my childhood,
a link with the past."

"But he gave me fifteen dollars, Ignatius."

"Please. Don't talk about it anymore. The whole business is
sacrilegious. Goodness knows what degenerate uses he will find for that
hat. Do you have the fifteen dollars on you?"

"I still got seven left."

"Then why don't we stop and eat something?" Ignatius pointed to the cart
at the corner. It was shaped like a hot dog on wheels. "I believe that
they vend foot-long hot dogs."

"Hot dogs? Honey, in all this rain and cold we gonna stand outside and
eat weenies?"

"It's a thought."

"No," Mrs. Reilly said with somewhat beery courage. "Let's get home. I
wouldn't eat nothing outta one of them dirty wagons anyway. They all
operated by a bunch of bums."

"If you insist," Ignatius said, pouting. "Although I am rather hungry,
and you have, after all, just sold a memento of my childhood for thirty
pieces of silver, so to speak."

They continued their little pattern of steps along the wet flagstones of
Bourbon Street. On St. Ann they found the old Plymouth easily. Its high
roof stood above all the other cars, its best feature. The Plymouth was
always easy to find in supermarket parking lots. Mrs. Reilly climbed the
curb twice trying to force the car out of the parking place and left the
impression of a 1946 Plymouth bumper in the hood of the Volkswagen in
the rear.

"My nerves!" Ignatius said. He was slumped down in the seat so that just
the top of his green hunting cap appeared in the window, looking like
the tip of a promising watermelon. From the rear, where he always sat,
having read somewhere that the seat next to the driver was the most
dangerous, he watched his mother's wild and inexpert shifting with
disapproval. "I suspect that you have effectively demolished the small
car that someone innocently parked behind this bus. You had better
succeed in getting out of this spot before its owner happens along."

"Shut up, Ignatius. You making me nervous," Mrs. Reilly said, looking at
the hunting cap in the rearview mirror.

Ignatius got up on the seat and looked out of the rear window.

"That car is a total wreck. Your driver's license, if you do indeed have
one, will doubtlessly be revoked. I certainly wouldn't blame them."

"Lay down there and take a nap," his mother said as the car jerked back
again.

"Do you think that I could sleep now? I'm afraid for my life. Are you
sure that you're turning the wheel the right way?"

Suddenly the car leaped out of the parking spot and skidded across the
wet street into a post supporting a wrought-iron balcony. The post fell
away to one side, and the Plymouth crunched against the building.

"Oh, my God!" Ignatius screamed from the rear. "What have you done now?"

"Call a priest!"

"I don't think that we're injured, Mother. However, you have just ruined
my stomach for the next few days." Ignatius rolled down one of the rear
windows and studied the fender that was pressed against the wall. "We
shall need a new headlight on this side, I imagine."

"What we gonna do?"

"If I were driving, I would put the auto in reverse and back gracefully
away from the scene. Someone will certainly press charges. The people
who own this wreck of a building have been waiting for an opportunity
like this for years. They probably spread grease on the street after
nightfall hoping that motorists like you will spin toward their hovel."
He belched. "My digestion has been destroyed. I think that I am
beginning to bloat!"

Mrs. Reilly shifted the worn gears and inched slowly backward. As the
car moved, the splintering of wood sounded over their heads, a
splintering that changed into splitting of boards and scraping of metal.
Then the balcony was falling in large sections, thundering on the roof
of the car with the dull, heavy thud of grenades. The car, like a stoned
human, stopped moving, and a piece of wrought-iron decoration shattered
a rear window.

"Honey, are you okay?" Mrs. Reilly asked wildly after what seemed to be
the final bombardment.

Ignatius made a gagging sound. The blue and yellow eyes were watering.

"Say something, Ignatius," his mother pleaded, turning round just in
time to see Ignatius stick his head out of a window and vomit down the
side of the dented car.



Patrolman Mancuso was walking slowly down Chartres Street dressed in
ballet tights and a yellow sweater, a costume which the sergeant said
would enable him to bring in genuine, bona fide suspicious characters
instead of grandfathers and boys waiting for their mothers. The costume
was the sergeant's punishment. He had told Mancuso that from now on he
would be strictly responsible for bringing in suspicious characters,
that police headquarters had a costume wardrobe that would permit
Mancuso to be a new character every day. Forlornly, Patrolman Mancuso
had put on the tights before the sergeant, who had pushed him out of the
precinct and told him to shape up or get off the force.

In the two hours that he had been cruising the French Quarter, he had
captured no one. Twice things had looked hopeful. He had stopped a man
wearing a beret and asked for a cigarette, but the man had threatened to
have him arrested. Then he accosted a young man in a trench coat who was
wearing a lady's hat, but the young man had slapped him across the face
and dashed away.

As Patrolman Mancuso walked down Chartres rubbing his cheek, which still
smarted from the slap, he heard what seemed to be an explosion. Hoping
that a suspicious character had just thrown a bomb or shot himself, he
ran around the corner onto St. Ann and saw the green hunting cap
emitting vomit among the ruins.





Two





"With the breakdown of the Medieval system, the gods of Chaos, Lunacy,
and Bad Taste gained ascendancy." Ignatius was writing in one of his Big
Chief tablets.



After a period in which the western world had enjoyed order,
tranquility, unity, and oneness with its True God and Trinity, there
appeared winds of change which spelled evil days ahead. An ill wind
blows no one good. The luminous years of Abélard, Thomas à Becket, and
Everyman dimmed into dross; Fortuna's wheel had turned on humanity,
crushing its collarbone, smashing its skull, twisting its torso,
puncturing its pelvis, sorrowing its soul. Having once been so high,
humanity fell so low. What had once been dedicated to the soul was now
dedicated to the sale.



"That is rather fine," Ignatius said to himself and continued his
hurried writing.



Merchants and charlatans gained control of Europe, calling their
insidious gospel "The Enlightenment." The day of the locust was at hand,
but from the ashes of humanity there arose no Phoenix. The humble and
pious peasant, Piers Plowman, went to town to sell his children to the
lords of the New Order for purposes that we may call questionable at
best. (See Reilly, Ignatius J., Blood on Their Hands: The Crime of It
All, A study of some selected abuses in sixteenth century Europe, a
Monograph, 2 pages, 1950, Rare Book Room, Left Corridor, Third Floor,
Howard-Tilton Memorial Library, Tulane University, New Orleans 18,
Louisiana. Note: I mailed this singular monograph to the library as a
gift; however, I am not really certain that it was ever accepted. It may
well have been thrown out because it was only written in pencil on
tablet paper.) The gyre had widened; The Great Chain of Being had
snapped like so many paper clips strung together by some drooling idiot;
death, destruction, anarchy, progress, ambition, and self-improvement
were to be Piers' new fate. And a vicious fate it was to be: now he was
faced with the perversion of having to GO TO WORK.



His vision of history temporarily fading, Ignatius sketched a noose at
the bottom of the page. Then he drew a revolver and a little box on
which he neatly printed GAS CHAMBER. He scratched the side of the pencil
back and forth across the paper and labeled this APOCALYPSE. When he had
finished decorating the page, he threw the tablet to the floor among
many others that were scattered about. This had been a very productive
morning, he thought. He had not accomplished so much in weeks. Looking
at the dozens of Big Chief tablets that made a rug of Indian headdresses
around the bed, Ignatius thought smugly that on their yellowed pages and
wide-ruled lines were the seeds of a magnificent study in comparative
history. Very disordered, of course. But one day he would assume the
task of editing these fragments of his mentality into a jigsaw puzzle of
a very grand design; the completed puzzle would show literate men the
disaster course that history had been taking for the past four
centuries. In the five years that he had dedicated to this work, he had
produced an average of only six paragraphs monthly. He could not even
remember what he had written in some of the tablets, and he realized
that several were filled principally with doodling. However, Ignatius
thought calmly, Rome was not built in a day.

Ignatius pulled his flannel nightshirt up and looked at his bloated
stomach. He often bloated while lying in bed in the morning
contemplating the unfortunate turn that events had taken since the
Reformation. Doris Day and Greyhound Scenicruisers, whenever they came
to mind, created an even more rapid expansion of his central region. But
since the attempted arrest and the accident, he had been bloating for
almost no reason at all, his pyloric valve snapping shut
indiscriminately and filling his stomach with trapped gas, gas which had
character and being and resented its confinement. He wondered whether
his pyloric valve might be trying, Cassandralike, to tell him something.
As a medievalist Ignatius believed in the rota Fortunae, or wheel of
fortune, a central concept in De Consolatione Philosophiae, the
philosophical work which had laid the foundation for medieval thought.
Boethius, the late Roman who had written the Consolatione while unjustly
imprisoned by the emperor, had said that a blind goddess spins us on a
wheel, that our luck comes in cycles. Was the ludicrous attempt to
arrest him the beginning of a bad cycle? Was his wheel rapidly spinning
downward? The accident was also a bad sign. Ignatius was worried. For
all his philosophy, Boethius had still been tortured and killed. Then
Ignatius's valve closed again, and he rolled over on his left side to
press the valve open.

"Oh, Fortuna, blind, heedless goddess, I am strapped to your wheel,"
Ignatius belched. "Do not crush me beneath your spokes. Raise me on
high, divinity."

"What you mumbling about in there, boy?" his mother asked through the
closed door.

"I am praying," Ignatius answered angrily.

"Patrolman Mancuso's coming today to see me about the accident. You
better say a little Hail Mary for me, honey."

"Oh, my God," Ignatius muttered.

"I think it's wonderful you praying, babe. I been wondering what you do
locked up in there all the time."

"Please go away!" Ignatius screamed. "You're shattering my religious
ecstasy."

Bouncing up and down on his side vigorously, Ignatius sensed a belch
rising in his throat, but when he expectantly opened his mouth he
emitted only a small burp. Still, the bouncing had some physiological
effect. Ignatius touched the small erection that was pointing downward
into the sheet, held it, and lay still trying to decide what to do. In
this position, with the red flannel nightshirt around his chest and his
massive stomach sagging into the mattress, he thought somewhat sadly
that after eighteen years with his hobby it had become merely a
mechanical physical act stripped of the flights of fancy and invention
that he had once been able to bring to it. At one time he had almost
developed it into an art form, practicing the hobby with the skill and
fervor of an artist and philosopher, a scholar and gentleman. There were
still hidden in his room several accessories which he had once used, a
rubber glove, a piece of fabric from a silk umbrella, a jar of Noxema.
Putting them away again after it was all over had eventually grown too
depressing.

Ignatius manipulated and concentrated. At last a vision appeared, the
familiar figure of the large and devoted collie that had been his pet
when he was in high school. "Woof!" Ignatius almost heard Rex say once
again. "Woof! Woof! Arf!" Rex looked so lifelike. One ear drooped. He
panted. The apparition jumped over a fence and chased a stick that
somehow landed in the middle of Ignatius's quilt. As the tan and white
fur grew closer, Ignatius's eyes dilated, crossed, and closed, and he
lay wanly back among his four pillows, hoping that he had some Kleenex
in his room.





II





"I come about that porter job you got advertise in the paper."

"Yeah?" Lana Lee looked at the sunglasses. "You got any references?"

"A po-lice gimme a reference. He tell me I better get my ass gainfully
employ," Jones said and shot a jet of smoke out into the empty bar.

"Sorry. No police characters. Not in a business like this. I got an
investment to watch."

"I ain exactly a character yet, but I can tell they gonna star that
vagran no visible means of support stuff on me. They told me." Jones
withdrew into a forming cloud. "I thought maybe the Night of Joy like to
help somebody become a member of the community, help keep a poor color
boy outta jail. I keep the picket off, give the Night of Joy a good
civil right ratin."

"Cut out the crap."

"Hey! Whoa!"

"You got any experience as a porter?"

"Wha? Sweepin and moppin and all that nigger shit?"

"Watch your mouth, boy. I got a clean business."

"Hell, anybody do that, especially color peoples."

"I've been looking," Lana Lee said, becoming a grave personnel manager,
"for the right boy for this job for several days." She put her hands in
the pockets of her leather overcoat and looked into the sunglasses. This
was really a deal, like a present left on her doorstep. A colored guy
who would get arrested for vagrancy if he didn't work. She would have a
captive porter whom she could work for almost nothing. It was beautiful.
Lana felt good for the first time since she had come upon those two
characters messing up her bar. "The pay is twenty dollars week."

"Hey! No wonder the right man ain show up. Ooo-wee. Say, whatever happen
to the minimal wage?"

"You need a job, right? I need a porter. Business stinks. Take it from
there!"

"The las person workin in here musta starve to death."

"You work six days a week from ten to three. If you come in regular, who
knows? You might get a little raise."

"Don worry. I come in regular, anything keep my ass away from a po-lice
for a few hour," Jones said, blowing some smoke on Lana Lee. "Where you
keep them mutherfuckin broom?"

"One thing we gotta understand is keeping our mouth clean around here."

"Yes, ma'm. I sure don wanna make a bad impressia in a fine place like
the Night of Joy. Whoa!"

The door opened and Darlene came in wearing a satin cocktail dress and a
flowered hat, flouncing her skirt gracefully as she walked.

"How come you're so late?" Lana screamed at her. "I told you to be here
at one today."

"My cockatoo come down with a cold last night, Lana. It was awful. The
whole night he was up coughing right in my ear."

"Where do you think up excuses like that?"

"Well, it's true," Darlene answered in an injured voice. She put her
huge hat on the bar and climbed on a stool up into a cloud that Jones
had blown. "I hadda take him to the vet's this morning to get a vitamin
shot. I don't want that poor bird coughing all over my furniture."

"What got into your head that made you encourage those two characters
last night? Every day, every day, Darlene, I try to explain to you the
kind of clientele we want in here. Then I walk in and find you eating
crap off my bar with some old lady and a fat turd. You trying to close
down my business? People look in the door, see a combination like that,
they walk off to another bar. What I have to do to make you understand,
Darlene? How does a human being get through to a mind like yours?"

"I already told you I felt sorry for that poor woman, Lana. You oughta
seen how her son treated her. You oughta heard the story he told me
about a Greyhound bus. And all the time that sweet old lady sitting
there paying for his drinks. I had to take one of her cakes to make her
feel good."

"Well, the next time I find you encouraging people like that and ruining
my investment, I'm gonna kick you out on your behind. Is that clear?"

"Yes, ma'm."

"You sure you got what I said?"

"Yes, ma'm."

"Okay. Now show this boy where we keep our brooms and crap and get that
bottle that old lady broke cleaned up. You're in charge of getting this
whole goddam place as clean as a pin for what you did me last night. I'm
going shopping." Lana got to the door and turned around. "I don't want
nobody fooling with that cabinet under the bar."

"I swear," Darlene said to Jones after Lana had swung through the door,
"this place is worse than the army. She just hire you today?"

"Yeah," Jones answered. "She ain exactly hire me. She kinda buying me
off a auction block."

"At least you gonna get a salary. I only work on commission for how much
I get people to drink. You think that's easy? Try to get some guy to buy
more than one of the kinda drinks they serve in here. All water. They
gotta spend ten, fifteen dollars to get any effect at all. I swear, it's
a tough job. Lana even pumps water in the champagne. You oughta taste
that. Then she's all the time complaining about how business stinks. She
oughta buy a drink at this bar and find out. Even when she's got only
about five people drinking in here she's making a fortune. Water don't
cost nothing."

"Wha she go shoppin for? A whip?"

"Don't ask me. Lana never tells me nothin. That Lana's a funny one."
Darlene blew her nose daintily. "What I really wanna be is an exotic. I
been practicing in my apartment on a routine. If I can get Lana to let
me dance in here at night, I can get me a regular salary and quit
hustling water on commission. Now that I think of it, I oughta get me
some commission for what them people drank up in here last night. That
old lady sure drank up a lotta beer. I don't see what Lana's got to
complain about. Business is business. That fat man and his momma wasn't
much worse than plenty we get in here. I think the thing got Lana was
that funny green cap he had stuck up on his head. When he was talking,
he'd pull the earflap down, and when he was listening, he'd stick it up
again. By the time Lana got here, everybody was hollering at him, so he
had both flaps stuck out like wings. You know, it looked sorta funny."

"And you say this fat cat travlin around with his momma?" Jones asked,
making a mental association.

"Uh huh." Darlene folded her handkerchief and slipped it into her bosom.
"I sure hope they don't ever decide to hang around here again. I'll
really be in trouble. Jesus." Darlene sounded worried. "Look, we better
do something about this place before Lana comes back. But listen. Don't
knock yourself out cleaning up this dump. I never seen it really clean
since I been here. And it's so dark in here all the time, nobody can
tell the difference. To hear Lana talk, you'd think this hole was the
Ritz."

Jones shot out a fresh cloud. Through his glasses he could hardly see
anything at all.





III





Patrolman Mancuso enjoyed riding the motorcycle up St. Charles Avenue.
At the precinct he had borrowed a large and loud one that was all
chromium and baby blue, and at the touch of a switch it could become a
pinball machine of flashing, winking, blinking red and white lights. The
siren, a cacophony of twelve crazed bobcats, was enough to make
suspicious characters within a half-mile radius defecate in panic and
rush for cover. Patrolman Mancuso's love for the motorcycle was
platonically intense.

The forces of evil generated by the hideous -- and apparently impossible
to uncover -- underground of suspicious characters seemed remote to him
this afternoon, though. The ancient oaks of St. Charles Avenue arched
over the avenue like a canopy shielding him from the mild winter sun
that splashed and sparkled on the chrome of the motorcycle. Although the
days had lately been cold and damp, the afternoon had that sudden,
surprising warmth that makes New Orleans winters gentle. Patrolman
Mancuso appreciated the mildness, for he was wearing only a T-shirt and
Bermuda shorts, the sergeant's costume selection for the day. The long
red beard that hooked over his ears by means of wires did manage to warm
his chest a little; he had snatched the beard from the locker while the
sergeant wasn't looking.

Patrolman Mancuso inhaled the moldy scent of the oaks and thought, in a
romantic aside, that St. Charles Avenue must be the loveliest place in
the world. From time to time he passed the slowly rocking streetcars
that seemed to be leisurely moving toward no special destination,
following their route through the old mansions on either side of the
avenue. Everything looked so calm, so prosperous, so unsuspicious. On
his own time he was going up to see that poor Widow Reilly. She had
looked so pitiful crying in the middle of that wreck. The least he could
do was try to help her.

At Constantinople Street he turned toward the river, sputtering and
growling through a declining neighborhood until he reached a block of
houses built in the 1880s and 90s, wooden Gothic and Gilded Age relics
that dripped carving and scrollwork. Boss Tweed suburban stereotypes
separated by alleys so narrow that a yardstick could almost bridge them
and fenced in by iron pikes and low walls of crumbling brick. The larger
houses had become impromptu apartment buildings, their porches converted
into additional rooms. In some of the front yards there were aluminum
carports, and bright aluminum awnings had been installed on one or two
of the buildings. It was a neighborhood that had degenerated from
Victorian to nothing in particular, a block that had moved into the
twentieth century carelessly and uncaringly -- and with very limited
funds.

The address that Patrolman Mancuso was looking for was the tiniest
structure on the block, aside from the carports, a Lilliput of the
eighties. A frozen banana tree, brown and stricken, languished against
the front of the porch, the tree preparing to collapse as the iron fence
had done long ago. Near the dead tree there was a slight mound of earth
and a leaning Celtic cross cut from plywood. The 1946 Plymouth was
parked in the front yard, its bumper pressed against the porch, its
taillights blocking the brick sidewalk. But, except for the Plymouth and
the weathered cross and the mummified banana tree, the tiny yard was
completely bare. There were no shrubs. There was no grass. And no birds
sang.

Patrolman Mancuso looked at the Plymouth and saw the deep crease in its
roof and the fender, filled with concave circles, that was separated
from the body by three or four inches of space. VAN CAMP'S PORK AND
BEANS was printed on the piece of cardboard taped across the hole that
had been the rear window. Stopping by the grave, he read REX in faded
letters on the cross. Then he climbed the worn brick steps and heard
through the closed shutters a booming chant.



Big girls don't cry.

Big girls don't cry.

Big girls, they don't cry-yi-yi.

They don't cry.

Big girls, they don't cry...yi.



While he was waiting for someone to answer the bell, he read the faded
sticker on the crystal of the door, "A slip of the lip can sink a ship."
Below a WAVE held her finger to lips that had turned tan.

Along the block some people were out on their porches looking at him and
the motorcycle. The shutters across the street that slowly flipped up
and down to get the proper focus indicated that he also had a
considerable unseen audience, for a police motorcycle in the block was
an event, especially if its driver wore shorts and a red beard. The
block was poor, certainly, but honest. Suddenly self-conscious,
Patrolman Mancuso rang the bell again and assumed what he considered his
erect, official posture. He gave his audience his Mediterranean profile,
but the audience saw only a small and sallow figure whose shorts hung
clumsily in the crotch, whose spindly legs looked too naked in
comparison to the formal garters and nylon socks that hung near the
ankles. The audience remained curious, but unimpressed; a few were not
even especially curious, the few who had expected some such vision to
visit that miniature house eventually.



Big girls don't cry

Big girls don't cry.



Patrolman Mancuso knocked savagely at the shutters.



Big girls don't cry.

Big girls don't cry.



"They home," a woman screamed through the shutters of the house next
door, an architect's vision of Jay Gould domestic. "Miss Reilly's prolly
in the kitchen. Go around the back. What are you, mister? A cop?"

"Patrolman Mancuso. Undercover," he answered sternly.

"Yeah?" There was a moment of silence. "Which one you want, the boy or
the mother?"

"The mother."

"Well, that's good. You'd never get a hold of him. He's watching the TV.
You hear that? It's driving me nuts. My nerves is shot."

Patrolman Mancuso thanked the woman's voice and walked into the dank
alley. In the back yard he found Mrs. Reilly hanging a spotted and
yellowed sheet on a line that ran through the bare fig trees.

"Oh, it's you," Mrs. Reilly said after a moment. She had almost started
to scream when she saw the man with the red beard appear in her yard.
"How you doing, Mr. Mancuso? What them people said?" She stepped
cautiously over the broken brick paving in her brown felt moccasins.
"Come on in the house and we'll have us a nice cup of coffee."

The kitchen was a large, high-ceilinged room, the largest in the house,
and it smelled of coffee and old newspapers. Like every room in the
house, it was dark; the greasy wallpaper and brown wooden moldings would
have transformed any light into gloom, and from the alley very little
light filtered in anyway. Although the interiors of homes did not
interest Patrolman Mancuso, still he did notice, as anyone would have,
the antique stove with the high oven and the refrigerator with the
cylindrical motor on top. Thinking of the electric fryers, gas driers,
mechanical mixers and beaters, waffle plates, and motorized rotisseries
that seemed to be always whirring, grinding, beating, cooling, hissing,
and broiling in the lunar kitchen of his wife, Rita, he wondered what
Mrs. Reilly did in this sparse room. Whenever a new appliance was
advertised on television, Mrs. Mancuso bought it no matter how obscure
its uses were.

"Now tell me what the man said." Mrs. Reilly began boiling a pot of milk
on her Edwardian gas stove. "How much I gotta pay? You told him I was a
poor widow with a child to support, huh?"

"Yeah, I told him that," Patrolman Mancuso said, sitting erectly in his
chair and looking hopefully at the kitchen table covered with oilcloth.
"Do you mind if I put my beard on the table? It's kinda hot in here and
it's sticking my face."

"Sure, go ahead, babe. Here. Have a nice jelly doughnut. I just bought
them fresh this morning over by Magazine Street. Ignatius says to me
this morning, ‘Momma, I sure feel like a jelly doughnut.' You know? So I
went over by the German and bought him two dozen. Look, they got a few
left."

She offered Patrolman Mancuso a torn and oily cake box that looked as if
it had been subjected to unusual abuse during someone's attempt to take
all of the doughnuts at once. At the bottom of the box Patrolman Mancuso
found two withered pieces of doughnut out of which, judging by their
moist edges, the jelly had been sucked.

"Thank you anyway, Miss Reilly. I had me a big lunch."

"Aw, ain't that a shame." She filled two cups half full with thick cold
coffee and poured the boiling milk in up to the rim. "Ignatius loves his
doughnuts. He says to me, ‘Momma, I love my doughnuts.'" Mrs. Reilly
slurped a bit at the rim of her cup. "He's out in the parlor right now
looking at TV. Every afternoon, as right as rain, he looks at that show
where them kids dance." In the kitchen the music was somewhat fainter
than it had been on the porch. Patrolman Mancuso pictured the green
hunting cap bathed in the blue-white glow of the television screen. "He
don't like the show at all, but he won't miss it. You oughta hear what
he says about them poor kids."

"I spoke with the man this morning," Patrolman Mancuso said, hoping that
Mrs. Reilly had exhausted the subject of her son.

"Yeah?" She put three spoons of sugar in her coffee and, holding the
spoon in the cup with her thumb so that the handle threatened to
puncture her eyeball, she slurped a bit more. "What he said, honey?"

"I told him I investigated the accident and that you just skidded on a
wet street."

"That sounds good. So what he said then, babe?"

"He said he don't want to go to court. He wants a settlement now."

"Oh, my God!" Ignatius bellowed from the front of the house. "What an
egregious insult to good taste."

"Don't pay him no mind," Mrs. Reilly advised the startled policeman. "He
does that all the time he looks at the TV. A ‘settlement.' That means he
wants some money, huh?"

"He even got a contractor to appraise the damage. Here, this is the
estimate."

Mrs. Reilly took the sheet of paper and read the typed column of
itemized figures beneath the contractor's letterhead.

"Lord! A thousand and twenty dollars. This is terrible. How I'm gonna
pay that?" She dropped the estimate on the oilcloth. "You sure that is
right?"

"Yes, ma'm. He's got a lawyer working on it, too. It's all on the up and
up."

"Where I'm gonna get a thousand dollars, though? All me and Ignatius got
is my poor husband's Social Security and a little two-bit pension, and
that don't come to much."

"Do I believe the total perversion that I am witnessing?" Ignatius
screamed from the parlor. The music had a frantic, tribal rhythm; a
chorus of falsettos sang insinuatingly about loving all night long.

"I'm sorry," Patrolman Mancuso said, almost heartbroken over Mrs.
Reilly's financial quandary.

"Aw, it's not your fault, darling," she said glumly. "Maybe I can get a
mortgage on the house. We can't do nothing about it, huh?"

"No, ma'm," Patrolman Mancuso answered, listening to some sort of
approaching stampede.

"The children on that program should all be gassed," Ignatius said as he
strode into the kitchen in his nightshirt. Then he noticed the guest and
said coldly, "Oh."

"Ignatius, you know Mr. Mancuso. Say ‘Hello.'"

"I do believe that I've seen him about," Ignatius said and looked out
the back door.

Patrolman Mancuso was too startled by the monstrous flannel nightshirt
to reply to Ignatius's pleasantry.

"Ignatius, honey, the man wants over a thousand dollars for what I did
to his building."

"A thousand dollars? He will not get a cent. We shall have him
prosecuted immediately. Contact our attorneys, Mother."

"Our attorneys? He's got a estimate from a contractor. Mr. Mancuso here
says they's nothing I can do."

"Oh. Well, you shall have to pay him then."

"I could take it to court if you think it's best."

"Drunken driving," Ignatius said calmly. "You haven't a chance."

Mrs. Reilly looked depressed.

"But Ignatius, a thousand twenty dollars."

"I am certain that you can procure some funds," he told her. "Is there
any more coffee, or have you given the last to this carnival masker?"

"We can mortgage the house."

"Mortgage the house? Of course we won't."

"What else we gonna do, Ignatius?"

"There are means," Ignatius said absently. "I wish that you wouldn't
bother me with this. That program always increases my anxiety anyway."
He smelled the milk before putting it into the pot. "I would suggest
that you telephone that dairy immediately. This milk is quite aged."

"I can get a thousand dollars over by the Homestead," Mrs. Reilly told
the silent patrolman quietly. "The house is good security. I had me a
real estate agent offered me seven thousand last year."

"The ironic thing about that program," Ignatius was saying over the
stove, keeping one eye peeled so that he could seize the pot as soon as
the milk began to boil, "is that it is supposed to be an exemplum to the
youth of our nation. I would like very much to know what the Founding
Fathers would say if they could see these children being debauched to
further the cause of Clearasil. However, I always suspected that
democracy would come to this." He painstakingly poured the milk into his
Shirley Temple mug. "A firm rule must be imposed upon our nation before
it destroys itself. The United States needs some theology and geometry,
some taste and decency. I suspect that we are teetering on the edge of
the abyss."

"Ignatius, I'm gonna have to go by the Homestead tomorrow."

"We shall not deal with those usurers, Mother." Ignatius was feeling
around in the cookie jar. "Something will turn up."

"Ignatius, honey, they can put me in jail."

"Ho hum. If you are going to stage one of your hysterical scenes, I
shall have to return to the living room. As a matter of fact, I think I
will."

He billowed out again in the direction of the music, the shower shoes
flapping loudly against the soles of his huge feet.

"What I'm gonna do with a boy like that?" Mrs. Reilly sadly asked
Patrolman Mancuso. "He don't care about his poor dear mother. Sometimes
I think Ignatius wouldn't mind if they did throw me in jail. He's got a
heart of ice, that boy."

"You spoiled him," Patrolman Mancuso said. "A woman's gotta watch she
don't spoil her kids."

"How many chirren you got, Mr. Mancuso?"

"Three. Rosalie, Antoinette, and Angelo, Jr."

"Aw, ain't that nice. I bet they sweet, huh? Not like Ignatius." Mrs.
Reilly shook her head. "Ignatius was such a precious child. I don't know
what made him change. He used to say to me, ‘Momma, I love you.' He
don't say that no more."

"Aw, don't cry," Patrolman Mancuso said, deeply moved. "I'll make you
some more coffee."

"He don't care if they lock me up," Mrs. Reilly sniffed. She opened the
oven and took out a bottle of muscatel. "You want some nice wine, Mr.
Mancuso?"

"No thanks. Being on the force, I gotta make a impression. I gotta
always be on the lookout for people, too."

"You don't mind?" Mrs. Reilly asked rhetorically and took a long drink
from the bottle. Patrolman Mancuso began boiling the milk, hovering over
the stove in a very domestic manner. "Sometimes I sure get the blues.
Life's hard. I worked hard, too. I been good."

"You oughta look on the bright side," Patrolman Mancuso said.

"I guess so," Mrs. Reilly said. "Some people got it harder than me, I
guess. Like my poor cousin, wonderful woman. Went to mass every day of
her life. She got knocked down by a streetcar over on Magazine Street
early one morning while she was on her way to Fisherman's Mass. It was
still dark out."

"Personally, I never let myself get low," Patrolman Mancuso lied. "You
gotta look up. You know what I mean? I got a dangerous line of work."

"You could get yourself killed."

"Sometimes I don't apprehend nobody all day. Sometimes I apprehend the
wrong person."

"Like that old man in front of D. H. Holmes. That's my fault, Mr.
Mancuso. I shoulda guessed Ignatius was wrong all along. It's just like
him. All the time I'm telling him, ‘Ignatius, here, put on this nice
shirt. Put on this nice sweater I bought you.' But he don't listen. Not
that boy. He's got a head like a rock."

"Then sometimes I get problems at home. With three kids, my wife's very
nervous."

"Nerves is a terrible thing. Poor Miss Annie, the next-door lady, she's
got nerves. Always screaming about Ignatius making noise."

"That's my wife. Sometimes I gotta get outta the house. If I was another
kind of man, sometimes I could really go get myself good and drunk. Just
between us."

"I gotta have my little drink. It relieves the pressure. You know?"

"What I do is go bowl."

Mrs. Reilly tried to imagine little Patrolman Mancuso with a big bowling
ball and said, "You like that, huh?"

"Bowling's wonderful, Miss Reilly. It takes your mind off things."

"Oh, my heavens!" a voice shouted from the parlor. "These girls are
doubtless prostitutes already. How can they present horrors like this to
the public?"

"I wish I had me a hobby like that."

"You oughta try bowling."

"Ay-yi-yi. I already got arthuritis in my elbow. I'm too old to play
around with them balls. I'd wrench my back."

"I got a aunt, sixty-five, a grammaw, and she goes bowling all the time.
She's even on a team."

"Some women are like that. Me, I never was much for sports."

"Bowling's more than a sport," Patrolman Mancuso said defensively. "You
meet plenty people over by the alley. Nice people. You could make you
some friends."

"Yeah, but it's just my luck to drop one of them balls on my toe. I got
bum feet already."

"Next time I go by the alley, I'll let you know. I'll bring my aunt. You
and me and my aunt, we'll go down by the alley. Okay?"

"Mother, when was this coffee dripped?" Ignatius demanded, flapping into
the kitchen again.

"Just about a hour ago. Why?"

"It certainly tastes brackish."

"I thought it was very good," Patrolman Mancuso said. "Just as good as
they serve at the French Market. I'm making some more now. You want a
cup?"

"Pardon me," Ignatius said. "Mother, are you going to entertain this
gentleman all afternoon? I would like to remind you that I am going to
the movies tonight and that I am due at the theater promptly at seven so
that I can see the cartoon. I would suggest that you begin preparing
something to eat."

"I better go," Patrolman Mancuso said.

"Ignatius, you oughta be ashamed," Mrs. Reilly said in an angry voice.
"Me and Mr. Mancuso here just having some coffee. You been nasty all
afternoon. You don't care where I raise that money. You don't care if
they lock me up. You don't care about nothing."

"Am I going to be attacked in my own home before a stranger with a false
beard?"

"My heart's broke."

"Oh, really." Ignatius turned on Patrolman Mancuso. "Will you kindly
leave? You are inciting my mother."

"Mr. Mancuso's not doing nothing but being nice."

"I better go," Patrolman Mancuso said apologetically.

"I'll get that money," Mrs. Reilly screamed. "I'll sell this house. I'll
sell it out from under you, boy. I'll go stay by a old folks' home."

She grabbed an end of the oilcloth and wiped her eyes.

"If you do not leave," Ignatius said to Patrolman Mancuso, who was
hooking on his beard, "I shall call the police."

"He is the police, stupid."

"This is totally absurd," Ignatius said and flapped away. "I am going to
my room."

He slammed his door and snatched a Big Chief tablet from the floor.
Throwing himself back among the pillows on the bed, he began doodling on
a yellowed page. After almost thirty minutes of pulling at his hair and
chewing on the pencil, he began to compose a paragraph.



Were Hroswitha with us today, we would all look to her for counsel and
guidance. From the austerity and tranquility of her medieval world, the
penetrating gaze of this legendary Sybil of a holy nun would exorcise
the horrors which materialize before our eyes in the name of television.
If we could only juxtapose one eyeball of this sanctified woman and a
television tube, both being roughly of the same shape and design, what a
phantasmagoria of exploding electrodes would occur. The images of those
lasciviously gyrating children would disintegrate into so many ions and
molecules, thereby effecting the catharsis which the tragedy of the
debauching of the innocent necessarily demands.



Mrs. Reilly stood in the hall looking at the DO NOT DISTURB sign printed
on a sheet of Big Chief paper and stuck to the door by an old
flesh-colored Band-aid.

"Ignatius, let me in there, boy," she screamed.

"Let you in here?" Ignatius said through the door. "Of course I won't. I
am occupied at the moment with an especially succinct passage."

"You let me in."

"You know that you are never allowed in here."

Mrs. Reilly pounded at the door.

"I don't know what is happening to you, Mother, but I suspect that you
are momentarily deranged. Now that I think of it, I am too frightened to
open the door. You may have a knife or a broken wine bottle."

"Open up this door, Ignatius."

"Oh, my valve! It's closing!" Ignatius groaned loudly. "Are you
satisfied now that you have ruined me for the rest of the evening?"

Mrs. Reilly threw herself against the unpainted wood.

"Well, don't break the door," he said finally and, after a few moments,
the bolt slid open.

"Ignatius, what's all this trash on the floor?"

"That is my worldview that you see. It still must be incorporated into a
whole, so be careful where you step."

"And all the shutters closed. Ignatius! It's still light outside."

"My being is not without its Proustian elements," Ignatius said from the
bed, to which he had quickly returned. "Oh, my stomach."

"It smells terrible in here."

"Well, what do you expect? The human body, when confined, produces
certain odors which we tend to forget in this age of deodorants and
other perversions. Actually, I find the atmosphere of this room rather
comforting. Schiller needed the scent of apples rotting in his desk in
order to write. I, too, have my needs. You may remember that Mark Twain
preferred to lie supinely in bed while composing those rather dated and
boring efforts which contemporary scholars try to prove meaningful.
Veneration of Mark Twain is one of the roots of our current intellectual
stalemate."

"If I know it was like this, I'd been in here long ago."

"I do not know why you are in here now, as a matter of fact, or why you
have this sudden compulsion to invade my sanctuary. I doubt whether it
will ever be the same after the trauma of this intrusion by an alien
spirit."

"I came to talk to you, boy. Get your face out them pillows."

"This must be the influence of that ludicrous representative of the law.
He seems to have turned you against your own child. By the way, he has
left, hasn't he?"

"Yes, and I apologized to him over the way you acted."

"Mother, you are standing on my tablets. Will you please move a little?
Isn't it enough that you have destroyed my digestion without destroying
the fruits of my brain also?"

"Well, where I'm gonna stand, Ignatius? You want me to get in bed with
you?" Mrs. Reilly asked angrily.

"Watch out where you're stepping, please!" Ignatius thundered. "My God,
never has anyone been so totally and so literally stormed and besieged.
What is it anyway that has driven you in here in this state of complete
mania? Could it be the stench of cheap muscatel that is assaulting my
nostrils?"

"I made up my mind. You gonna go out and get you a job."

Oh, what low joke was Fortuna playing on him now? Arrest, accident, job.
Where would this dreadful cycle ever end?

"I see," Ignatius said calmly. "Knowing that you are congenitally
incapable of arriving at a decision of this importance, I imagine that
that mongoloid law officer put this idea into your head."

"Me and Mr. Mancuso talked like I used to talk to your poppa. You poppa
used to tell me what to do. I wish he was alive today."

"Mancuso and my father are alike only in that they both give the
impression of being rather inconsequential humans. However, your current
mentor is apparently the type of person who thinks that everything will
be all right if everyone works continually."

"Mr. Mancuso works hard. He's got a hard road at the precinct."

"I am certain that he supports several unwanted children who all hope to
grow up to be policemen, the girls included."

"He's got three sweet chirren."

"I can imagine." Ignatius began to bounce slowly. "Oh!"

"What are you doing? Are you fooling with that valve again? Nobody else
got him a valve but you. I ain't got no valve."

"Everyone has a valve!" Ignatius screamed. "Mine is simply more
developed. I am trying to open a passage which you have succeeded in
blocking. It may be permanently closed now for all I know."

"Mr. Mancuso says if you work you can help me pay off the man. He says
he thinks the man might take the money in installments."

"Your friend the patrolman says a great deal. You certainly bring people
out, as they say. I never suspected that he could be so loquacious or
that he was capable of such perceptive comment. Do you realize that he
is trying to destroy our home? It began the moment that he attempted
that brutal arrest in front of D. H. Holmes. Although you are too
limited to comprehend it all, Mother, this man is our nemesis. He's spun
our wheel downward."

"Wheel? Mr. Mancuso is a good man. You oughta be glad he didn't take you
in!"

"In my private apocalypse he will be impaled upon his own nightstick.
Anyway, it is inconceivable that I should get a job. I am very busy with
my work at the moment, and I feel that I am entering a very fecund
stage. Perhaps the accident jarred and loosened my thought. At any rate,
I accomplished a great deal today."

"We gotta pay that man, Ignatius. You wanna see me in jail? Wouldn't you
be ashamed with your poor momma behind bars?"

"Will you please stop talking about imprisonment? You seem to be
preoccupied with the thought. Actually, you seem to enjoy thinking about
it. Martyrdom is meaningless in our age." He belched quietly. "I would
suggest certain economies around the house. Somehow you will soon see
that you have the required amount."

"I spend all the money on you for food and whatnots."

"I have found several empty wine bottles about lately, the contents of
which I certainly did not consume."

"Ignatius!"

"I made the mistake of heating the oven the other day before inspecting
it properly. When I opened it to put in my frozen pizza, I was almost
blinded by a bottle of broiled wine that was preparing to explode. I
suggest that you divert some of the monies that you are pouring into the
liquor industry."

"For shame, Ignatius. A few bottles of Gallo muscatel, and you with all
them trinkets."

"Will you please define the meaning of trinkets?" Ignatius snapped.

"All them books. That gramaphone. That trumpet I bought you last month."

"I consider the trumpet a good investment, although our neighbor, Miss
Annie, does not. If she beats on my shutters again, I'll pour water on
her."

"Tomorrow we looking at the want ads in the paper. You gonna dress up
and go find you a job."

"I am afraid to ask what your idea of ‘dressing up' is. I will probably
be turned into an utter mockery."

"I'm gonna iron you a nice white shirt and you gonna put on one of your
poppa's nice ties."

"Do I believe what I am hearing?" Ignatius asked his pillow.

"It's either that, Ignatius, or I gotta take out a mortgage. You wanna
lose the roof over your head?"

"No! You will not mortgage this house." He pounded a great paw into the
mattress. "The whole sense of security which I have been trying to
develop would crumble. I will not have any disinterested party
controlling my domicile. I couldn't stand it. Just the thought of it
makes my hands break out."

He extended a paw so that his mother could examine the rash.

"That is out of the question," he continued. "It would bring all of my
latent anxieties to a head, and the result, I fear, would be very ugly
indeed. I would not want you to have to spend the remainder of your life
caring for a lunatic locked away somewhere in the attic. We shall not
mortgage the house. You must have some funds somewhere."

"I got a hundred fifty in the Hibernia Bank."

"My God, is that all? I hardly thought that we were existing so
precariously. However, it is fortunate that you have kept this from me.
Had I known how close we were to total penury, my nerves would have
given out long ago." Ignatius scratched his paws. "I must admit, though,
that the alternative for me is rather grim. I doubt very seriously
whether anyone will hire me."

"What do you mean, babe? You a fine boy with a good education."

"Employers sense in me a denial of their values." He rolled over onto
his back. "They fear me. I suspect that they can see that I am forced to
function in a century which I loathe. That was true even when I worked
for the New Orleans Public Library."

"But, Ignatius, that was the only time you worked since you got out of
college, and you was only there for two weeks."

"That is exactly what I mean," Ignatius replied, aiming a paper ball at
the bowl of the milk glass chandelier.

"All you did was paste them little slips in the books."

"Yes, but I had my own esthetic about pasting those slips. On some days
I could only paste in three or four slips and at the same time feel
satisfied with the quality of my work. The library authorities resented
my integrity about the whole thing. They only wanted another animal who
could slop glue on their best sellers."

"You think maybe you could get a job there again?"

"I seriously doubt it. At the time I said some rather cutting things to
the woman in charge of the processing department. They even revoked my
borrower's card. You must realize the fear and hatred which my
weltanschauung instills in people." Ignatius belched. "I won't mention
that misguided trip to Baton Rouge. That incident, I believe, caused me
to form a mental block against working."

"They was nice to you at college, Ignatius. Now tell the truth. They let
you hang around there a long time. They even let you teach a class."

"Oh, it was basically the same. Some poor white from Mississippi told
the dean that I was a propagandist for the Pope, which was patently
untrue. I do not support the current Pope. He does not at all fit my
concept of a good, authoritarian Pope. Actually, I am opposed to the
relativism of modern Catholicism quite violently. However, the boldness
of this ignorant lily-white redneck fundamentalist led my other students
to form a committee to demand that I grade and return their accumulated
essays and examinations. There was even a small demonstration outside
the window of my office. It was rather dramatic. For being such simple,
ignorant children, they managed it quite well. At the height of the
demonstration I dumped all of the old papers -- ungraded, of course --
out of the window and right onto the students' heads. The college was
too small to accept this act of defiance against the abyss of
contemporary academia."

"Ignatius! You never told me that."

"I did not want to excite you at the time. I also told the students
that, for the sake of humanity's future, I hoped that they were all
sterile." Ignatius arranged the pillows about his head. "I could never
have possibly read over the illiteracies and misconceptions burbling
from the dark minds of those students. It will be the same wherever I
work."

"You can get you a good job. Wait till they see a boy with a master's
degree."

Ignatius sighed heavily and said, "I see no alternative." He twisted his
face into a mask of suffering. There was no use fighting Fortuna until
the cycle was over. "You realize, of course, that this is all your
fault. The progress of my work will be greatly delayed. I suggest that
you go to your confessor and make some penance, Mother. Promise him that
you will avoid the path of sin and drinking in the future. Tell him what
the consequence of your moral failure has been. Let him know that you
have delayed the completion of a monumental indictment against our
society. Perhaps he will comprehend the magnitude of your failing. If he
is my type of priest, the penance will no doubt be rather strict.
However, I have learned to expect little from today's clergyman."

"I'm gonna be good, Ignatius. You'll see."

"There, there, I shall find some employment, although it will not
necessarily be what you would call a good job. I may have some valuable
insights which may benefit my employer. Perhaps the experience can give
my writing a new dimension. Being actively engaged in the system which I
criticize will be an interesting irony in itself." Ignatius belched
loudly. "If only Myrna Minkoff could see how low I've fallen."

"What that girl's doing now?" Mrs. Reilly asked suspiciously. "I put out
good money for you to go to college, and you have to pick up with
somebody like that."

"Myrna is still in New York, her native habitat. No doubt she is trying
to taunt the police into arresting her in some demonstration at this
very moment."

"She sure used to get me nervous playing on that guitar of hers all over
this house. If she's got money like you said, maybe you shoulda married
her. You two might of settled down and had a nice baby or something."

"Do I believe that such obscenity and filth is coming from the lips of
my own mother?" Ignatius bellowed. "Now run along and fix me some
dinner. I must be at the theater on time. It's a circus musical, a
heralded excess which I have been waiting to see for some time. We study
the want ads tomorrow."

"I'm so proud you gonna work at last," Mrs. Reilly said emotionally and
kissed her son somewhere in his damp moustache.





IV





"Look at that old gal," Jones mused to his psyche as the bus bounced and
threw him against the woman sitting beside him. "She think cause I color
I gonna rape her. She about to throw her grammaw ass out the window.
Whoa! I ain gonna rape nobody."

He moved discreetly away from her, crossing his legs and wishing that he
could smoke on the bus. He wondered who the fat cat in the green cap was
who was suddenly all over town. Where would that fat mother show up
next? There was something ghostly about that greencap freak.

"Well, I gonna tell that po-lice I gainfully employ, keep him off my
back, tell him I met up with a humanitaria payin me twenty dollar a
week. He say, ‘That fine, boy. I'm glad to see you straighten out.' And
I say, ‘Hey!' And he say, ‘Now maybe you be becomin a member of the
community.' And I say, ‘Yeah, I got me a nigger job and nigger pay. Now
I really a member of the community. Now I a real nigger. No vagran. Just
nigger.' Whoa! What kinda change you got?"

The old woman pulled the bell cord and got out of the seat, trying
self-consciously to avoid any contact with the anatomy of Jones, who
watched her writhing through the detachment of his green lenses.

"Look at that. She think I got siphlus and TB and a hard on and I gonna
cut her up with a razor and lif her purse. Ooo-wee."

The sunglasses watched the woman climb off the bus into a crowd standing
at the bus stop. Somewhere in the rear of the crowd an altercation was
going on. A man with a rolled-up newspaper in his hand was striking
another man who had a long red beard and was wearing Bermuda shorts. The
man in the beard looked familiar. Jones felt uneasy. First there was the
green-cap phantom and now this person he couldn't identify.

Jones turned from the window when the man in the red beard ran off and
opened the Life magazine that Darlene had given him. At least Darlene
had been pleasant to him at the Night of Joy. Darlene subscribed to Life
for purposes of self-improvement and, in giving it to Jones, had
suggested that he might find it helpful, too. Jones tried to plow
through an editorial about American involvement in the Far East but
stopped midway, wondering how something like that could help Darlene to
become an exotic, the goal that she had referred to again and again. He
turned back to the advertisements, for they were the things that
interested him in magazines. The selection in this magazine was
excellent. He liked the Aetna Life Insurance ad with the picture of the
lovely home that a couple had just bought. The Yardley Shaving Lotion
men looked cool and rich. That's how the magazine could help him. He
wanted to look just like those men.





V





When Fortuna spins you downward, go out to a movie and get more out of
life. Ignatius was about to say this to himself; then he remembered that
he went to the movies almost every night, no matter which way Fortuna
was spinning.

He sat at attention in the darkness of the Prytania only a few rows from
the screen, his body filling the seat and protruding into the two
adjoining ones. On the seat to his right he had stationed his overcoat,
three Milky Ways, and two auxiliary bags of popcorn, the bags neatly
rolled at the top to keep the popcorn warm and crisp. Ignatius ate his
current popcorn and stared raptly at the previews of coming attractions.
One of the films looked bad enough, he thought, to bring him back to the
Prytania in a few days. Then the screen glowed in bright, wide
technicolor, the lion roared, and the title of the excess flashed on the
screen before his miraculous blue and yellow eyes. His face froze and
his popcorn bag began to shake. Upon entering the theater, he had
carefully buttoned the two earflaps to the top of his cap, and now the
strident score of the musical assaulted his naked ears from a variety of
speakers. He listened to the music, detecting two popular songs which he
particularly disliked, and scrutinized the credits closely to find any
names of performers who normally nauseated him.

When the credits had ended and Ignatius had noted that several of the
actors, the composer, the director, the hair designer, and the assistant
producer were all people whose efforts had offended him at various times
in the past, there appeared in the technicolor a scene of many extras
milling about a circus tent. He greedily studied the crowd and found the
heroine standing near a sideshow.

"Oh, my God!" he screamed. "There she is."

The children in the rows in front of him turned and stared, but Ignatius
did not notice them. The blue and yellow eyes were following the
heroine, who was gaily carrying a pail of water to what turned out to be
her elephant.

"This is going to be even worse than I thought," Ignatius said when he
saw the elephant.

He put the empty popcorn bag to his full lips, inflated it, and waited,
his eyes gleaming with reflected technicolor. A tympany beat and the
soundtrack filled with violins. The heroine and Ignatius opened their
mouths simultaneously, hers in song, his in a groan. In the darkness two
trembling hands met violently. The popcorn bag exploded with a bang. The
children shrieked.

"What's all that noise?" the woman at the candy counter asked the
manager.

"He's here tonight," the manager told her, pointing across the theater
to the hulking silhouette at the bottom of the screen. The manager
walked down the aisle to the front rows, where the shrieking was growing
wilder. Their fear having dissipated itself, the children were holding a
competition of shrieking. Ignatius listened to the bloodcurdling little
trebles and giggles and gloated in his dark lair. With a few mild
threats, the manager quieted the front rows and then glanced down the
row in which the isolated figure of Ignatius rose like some great
monster among the little heads. But he was treated only to a puffy
profile. The eyes that shone under the green visor were following the
heroine and her elephant across the wide screen and into the circus
tent.

For a while Ignatius was relatively still, reacting to the unfolding
plot with only an occasional subdued snort. Then what seemed to be the
film's entire cast was up on the wires. In the foreground, on a trapeze,
was the heroine. She swung back and forth to a waltz. She smiled in a
huge close-up. Ignatius inspected her teeth for cavities and fillings.
She extended one leg. Ignatius rapidly surveyed its contours for
structural defects. She began to sing about trying over and over again
until you succeeded. Ignatius quivered as the philosophy of the lyrics
became clear. He studied her grip on the trapeze in the hope that the
camera would record her fatal plunge to the sawdust far below.

On the second chorus the entire ensemble joined in the song, smiling and
singing lustily about ultimate success while they swung, dangled,
flipped, and soared.

"Oh, good heavens!" Ignatius shouted, unable to contain himself any
longer. Popcorn spilled down his shirt and gathered in the folds of his
trousers. "What degenerate produced this abortion?"

"Shut up," someone said behind him.

"Just look at those smiling morons! If only all of those wires would
snap!" Ignatius rattled the few kernels of popcorn in his last bag.
"Thank God that scene is over."

When a love scene appeared to be developing, he bounded up out of his
seat and stomped up the aisle to the candy counter for more popcorn, but
as he returned to his seat, the two big pink figures were just preparing
to kiss.

"They probably have halitosis," Ignatius announced over the heads of the
children. "I hate to think of the obscene places that those mouths have
doubtlessly been before!"

"You'll have to do something," the candy woman told the manager
laconically. "He's worse than ever tonight."

The manager sighed and started down the aisle to where Ignatius was
mumbling, "Oh, my God, their tongues are probably all over each other's
capped and rotting teeth."


